=head1 PDL Book Credits

Several separate sources of material have been used to make this 2012
version of the PDL Book. The biggest source of material has been "PDL -
Scientific Programming in Perl", written in 2001 and added to over the
past decade by Karl Glazebrook, Christian Soller, Tuomas J. Lukka, Marc
Lehmann, Jarle Brinchmann, Doug Hunt, John Cerney, Robin Williams and
Tim Pickering.

The original source was written in LaTeX and LyX, which allowed
embedding of figures in the document. However, this has presented a
small hurdle for other authours to add their own material. With this in
mind, Matthew Kenworthy set about converting one chapter of the PDL book
into POD to see what could be done, and the result didn't look too bad
at all. Although this may seem to be a step back from the finer
formatting of LaTeX, tags can be included in POD so that the basic
documentation is readable at the command line, and there are enough
filters to provide clean output in HTML and PDF formats.

Several other people have carried out conversion of the original book
and figures into POD, and others have also contributed original new
material for the PDL Book.

In alphabetical order, we have:

Karl Glazebrook

Matthew Kenworthy

David Mertens

Chris Marshall

Joe Milosch

Creating.pod:

Original text from "PDL - Scientific Programming in Perl" (2001) Chap. 1

Authors: Karl Glazebrook, Marc Lehmann, John Cerney, Christian Soller,
Jarle Brinchmann, Robin Williams, Christopher Marshall, Tuomas J. Lukka,
Doug Hunt, Tim Pickering.

Modified to LyX by Chris Marshall for PDL 2.4.3, December 2006.

Converted to POD format by Mike Burns, May 2010.

Functions:

Written by Matthew Kenworthy 2011

PGPLOT.pod:

Original text from "PDL - Scientific Programming in Perl" (2001) Chap. 4

Authors: Karl Glazebrook, Marc Lehmann, John Cerney, Christian Söller,
Jarle Brinchmann, Robin Williams, Christopher Marshall, Tuomas J. Lukka,
Doug Hunt, Tim Pickering.

Modified to LyX by Chris Marshall for PDL 2.4.3, December 2006.

Converted to POD format by Matthew Kenworthy, May 2010.

PLplot:

Joe Milosch, also known as zentara on perlmonks, assembled this document.
David Merten, wrote most of the section and examples on Object Oriented usage,
which were taken from his slideshow on PLplot.

David Merten's slideshow on B<PDL::Graphics-PLplot>.  His very
informative slideshow can be downloaded or viewed at
L<http://www.slideshare.net/dcmertens/p-lplot-talk>  

PP.pod:

David Mertens <dcmertens.perl@gmail.com>

Copyright (c) 2011 David Mertens. All rights reserved.

This is free documentation; you can redistribute it and/or
modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.


